# Contributing to wild

If you'd like to help out, we'd love to hear from you. It's a good idea to reach out first to avoid
duplication of effort. Also, it'll make it possible for us to provide hints that might make what
you're trying to do easier.

## Options for communicating

Feel free to start a [discussion](https://github.com/davidlattimore/wild/discussions) or open an
[issue](https://github.com/davidlattimore/wild/issues).

You're also welcome to reach out directly to the following people:

* [David Lattimore](https://davidlattimore.github.io/about/) - original author and primary
  maintainer. I love talking about this stuff, so feel free to set up a video call to discuss.
  You're also welcome to PM me on the [rust-lang zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/).

## Ways you can contribute

* Use `wild` and let us know your experiences, or file issues for problems found.
* Open an issue or a discussion here on GitHub.
* Sending a PR related to some issue

## Running tests

To run tests (and have them pass) there are a number of pre-requisites to have installed on Linux:

* `clang` 'C' compiler
* `lld` linker
* `nightly-x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu` toolchain (add with `rustup install nightly-x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu`)
* `x86_64-unknown-linux-musl` target for the nightly toolchain (add
  with `rustup target add --toolchain nightly x86_64-unknown-linux-musl`)
* cranelift backend (add with `rustup component add rustc-codegen-cranelift-preview --toolchain nightly`)
* `clang-format` formatter

then use `cargo test` as usual.

## Running tests for other architectures on x86_64

Wild supports testing on non-native architectures using QEMU.

### Setup

1. Add required Rust targets:

  ```sh
  # For aarch64
  rustup target add --toolchain nightly aarch64-unknown-linux-gnu aarch64-unknown-linux-musl

  # For riscv64
  rustup target add --toolchain nightly riscv64gc-unknown-linux-gnu riscv64gc-unknown-linux-musl
  ```

2. Install required packages (for apt-based systems):

  ```sh
  # For aarch64
  sudo apt install qemu-user gcc-aarch64-linux-gnu g++-aarch64-linux-gnu binutils-aarch64-linux-gnu

  # For riscv64
  sudo apt install qemu-user gcc-riscv64-linux-gnu g++-riscv64-linux-gnu binutils-riscv64-linux-gnu
  ```

### Running tests

To run tests for a specific architecture:

```sh
# For aarch64
WILD_TEST_CROSS=aarch64 cargo test

# For riscv64
WILD_TEST_CROSS=riscv64 cargo test

# All
WILD_TEST_CROSS=aarch64,riscv64 cargo test
```

This runs both native tests and architecture-specific tests. QEMU is used for executing binaries for non-native, while linking and diffing are performed natively. Note that cross-compilation only works with GCC and rustc tests; clang-based tests currently disable cross-compilation.

## Configuration file for tests

Currently, the behavior for the following test options can be configured using the TOML format:

- `rustc_channel`: Specifies which Rust compiler channel to use when running tests that build Rust
  code. The default value is "default", which means no explicit toolchain is specified.

- `qemu_arch`: List of additional architectures (different from the host) to run tests for. This
  setting is overridden by the `$WILD_TEST_CROSS` environment variable. The default value is
  `[]`.

- `allow_rust_musl_target`: Specifies whether to allow the musl target Rust. The default value is
  `false`, so you’ll need to set it to `true` if you want to run tests targeting musl.

- `diff_ignore`: Adds extra rules to ignore certain diffs. This can be useful if you're developing
  on a system with an older version of GNU ld that doesn't perform certain optimisations.

- `run_all_diffs`: Enables diffing the output of wild against that of the existing linkers.
  By default, diffs are skipped. Set to `true` to enable.

A sample configuration file is provided as `test-config.toml.sample`. By default, Wild uses
`test-config.toml` as the configuration file. If you have written your configuration in a different
file, specify its location using the `WILD_TEST_CONFIG` environment variable as follows:

```sh
WILD_TEST_CONFIG=path_to_config cargo test
```

## Coding style for tests

C and C++ files follow Google style from clang-format that is enforced by an unit test. You can use the following command to format them:

```sh
clang-format -i wild/tests/sources/*.{c,cc,h}
```

Newer versions of clang-format might produce slightly different formatting.
If your code is correctly formatted locally but the CI job still reports formatting errors, update your clang-format to either the latest version or the version used in the failing CI job (the CI output prints its version on failure).
In general, formatting generated by newer versions should be accepted by older versions, but this isn’t guaranteed.

When working on tests, you can temporarily disable the formatting check by setting the `WILD_TEST_IGNORE_FORMAT` environment variable.

## Running external tests

Wild can run some external test suites. Currently only the test suite of mold is supported.

You can run the mold tests as follows:

```sh
# Clone the mold repository (only needed once)
git submodule update --init --recursive

cargo test --features mold_tests
```

You can use this command instead of the second one to run all external tests together:

```sh
cargo test --features external_tests
```

Some tests are configured to be skipped by default. A list of these skipped tests can be found at:

[wild/tests/external_tests/mold_skip_tests.toml](./wild/tests/external_tests/mold_skip_tests.toml): for the mold tests.

However, you can also run the tests without skipping any of them:

```sh
# Run mold tests without skipping any test
WILD_IGNORE_SKIP=mold cargo test --features mold_tests

# Run all external tests without skipping any test
WILD_IGNORE_SKIP=all cargo test --features external_tests
```

## Commit messages

The title of your commit message should ideally be written with a view to it being included in the
release notes. i.e. write what would be useful for a user of the linker to read. Implementation
details can go in the extended description.

When we write the release notes, we try to categorise commits into groups. You can help by prefixing
the commit title with a word that gives a clue as to which section it should go in. If you think it
shouldn't go in the release notes, you can prefix the title with "chore:" or "typo:", neither of
which get included in the notes. If in doubt, [conventional
commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/) is probably a good source of information
for how we aspire to format commit messages.

To see the current rules that we use for categorising commits, see `cliff.toml`.

## GitHub workflow

TL;DR: We're pretty relaxed. Feel free to force push or not. Squash, rebase, merge, whatever you
like, we'll find ways to work with it.

In order to make things like `git bisect` easier, this project maintains a linear sequence of
commits.

It's fine for you to use whatever workflow you like when making a PR. For example, if you want to
add fix-up commits as the PR progresses, that's fine. It's also fine to amend commits as you go.

All PRs get squashed when merging. We do this so that we have a reference to the PR in the commit
message, which makes it easier to find the change later and write the release notes. If you have
changes that you'd like to keep as separate commits, please send them as separate PRs.

When merging, by default we'll use the title and description of your PR as the commit message. So if
you want to change the commit message after you've created the PR, edit the title and / or the
description (first comment on the PR). We may sometimes edit the commit message ourselves when
merging.

Feel free to mark your PR as a draft at any stage if you know there's more you'd like to do with it
and want to avoid us merging it before it's ready.

## Coding style

This is mostly handled by rustfmt. A couple of the format options that we use aren't yet stable, so
you'll need to format with nightly. Before you upload your PR, you should run the following:

```sh
cargo +nightly fmt
```

### Naming

When in doubt, do what is done in the Rust standard library. e.g. when making a name CamelCase, only
the first letter of each "word" should be uppercase even if the "word" is an acronym. You can see
this in the standard library with types like `TcpStream` and `IoSlice`.

### One import per line

One style thing that might be slightly different is that we use one import per line. i.e. we don't
use `{}` in `use` statements. This has two benefits. Firstly, merge conflicts are significantly less
likely. Secondly, if a merge conflict does happen, it's significantly easier to resolve. The
downside is that it's more verbose, but since your IDE is probably adding these lines for you
anyway, it shouldn't matter.

### Panic policy

Panicking if there's a bug is OK. It's generally better to crash in a way that's easy to tell what
happened rather than produce an invalid executable. That said, lots of the code, when it detects an
inconsistent internal state (a bug), returns an error rather than panicking. The reason for this is
not to avoid the panic per se, but rather because by returning an error, we can attach more
contextual information to the error to help diagnose the problem. For example, we can add
information about what symbol we were processing and which input file we were looking at. This is
usually more useful for us than a stack trace showing where it was in the code. Also, since Wild is
very multi-threaded, if there's a bug that causes all the threads to panic, the output can get
pretty messed up.

So in summary, if you think something shouldn't happen, it's fine to panic. Calling `unwrap` is
fine. But if you're less sure that it can't happen, or you've observed it happen and need to debug
why it happened, then switching to returning an error is recommended.

## Building wild with wild

You can add or modify a `.cargo/config.toml` file to change the linker used to build `wild` to be `wild`!

The below example has entries for `musl` and `gnu` ABI targets:

```toml
[target.x86_64-unknown-linux-musl]
linker = "/usr/bin/clang"
rustflags = ["-C", "relocation-model=static", "-C", "link-arg=--ld-path=wild"]

[target.x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu]
linker = "/usr/bin/clang"
rustflags = ["-C", "link-arg=--ld-path=wild"]
```

The `.cargo/config.toml` file can be added in the root folder of the project, or somewhere else according to the
[Hierarchical structure](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/config.html) that `cargo` uses to determine config.

## Reading

Linkers are complex bits of software. Here are some resources that are good for learning what
linkers need to do.

* [Ian Lance Taylor's blog post series](https://lwn.net/Articles/276782/). Ian wrote the GNU Gold
  linker. This series is a bit old now, so doesn't have some more recent stuff, but is nonetheless a
  great introduction.
* [Maskray's blog](https://maskray.me/blog/). Maskray maintains the LLD linker and has many awesome
  blog posts about various linker-related topics. A few posts in particular:
  * [All about thread-local storage](https://maskray.me/blog/2021-02-14-all-about-thread-local-storage)
  * [All about Global Offset Table](https://maskray.me/blog/2021-08-29-all-about-global-offset-table)
  * [Copy relocations, canonical PLT entries and protected
    visibility](https://maskray.me/blog/2021-01-09-copy-relocations-canonical-plt-entries-and-protected)
  * [All about COMMON symbols](https://maskray.me/blog/2022-02-06-all-about-common-symbols). Despite
    their name, common symbols aren't commonly used. They are however used in libc, so are necessary
    if you want to be able to link pretty much anything.
  * Everything else with the [linker tag](https://maskray.me/blog/tags/linker/)
* For Wild specific content, there's [David Lattimore's](https://davidlattimore.github.io/) blog.
* There are also various specification documents. These may not be the best to read start-to-finish,
  but can be good when you need some specific details on something.
  * [ELF-64 Object File Format](https://uclibc.org/docs/elf-64-gen.pdf)
  * [ELF x86-64-ABI psABI](https://gitlab.com/x86-psABIs/x86-64-ABI)
  * [ELF Handling For Thread-Local Storage](https://www.uclibc.org/docs/tls.pdf)
  * [ELF for the Arm® 64-bit Architecture (AArch64)](https://github.com/ARM-software/abi-aa/blob/main/aaelf64/aaelf64.rst)
  * [System V ABI for the Arm® 64-bit Architecture (AArch64)](https://github.com/ARM-software/abi-aa/blob/main/sysvabi64/sysvabi64.rst)
* [A Deep dive into (implicit) Thread Local Storage](https://chao-tic.github.io/blog/2018/12/25/tls)

## Finding an issue to work on

* Whatever issue you work on, please comment on the issue to let us know you're working on it,
  otherwise two people might end up working on the same issue and that could be disappointing if
  someone then felt like they'd wasted their time. It's perfectly OK to say that you're going to
  work on something, then later realise that it's not for you.
* If you'd like to work on something that someone said they're working on, but they haven't provided
  an update in a while, feel free to politely ask if they're still working on it and mention that if
  they're not, you'd like to have a go.
* We may on occasion tag issues as [good first
  issue](https://github.com/davidlattimore/wild/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22).
  One person's good-first-issue might be too hard or too easy for another person, so this is a
  somewhat hard judgement to make.
* You're welcome to help out with other unassigned issues too, even if they don't have tags. If
  you're interested in possibly working on such an issue, comment on it and we'll see what guidance
  we can provide. This will also allow us to assign the issue to you so that other's don't duplicate
  efforts.
